
Orbifolds and Other Games

    About

Hey, Back Off!
Sun 12 July 2020 by Moshe Zadka

The choice in parameters for back-off configuration is important. It can be the difference between a barely noticable blip in service quality and an hours-long site outage. In order to explore the consequences of the choice, I wrote a little fictional ditty about a fictional website.

I hope you enjoy escaping into this fictional reality as much as I enjoyed writing about it.

Your recipe site is different. After all, recipe sites are a dime-a-dozen. With today's modern technology, any kid can put a quick mock-up together with Django, React, and MongoDB to store recipes and retrieve them by various attributes.

In order to make your recipe site stand above the rest, you made sure it uses really cutting edge techniques. From details of the web requests coming in, using sophisiticated language parsing and machine learning algorithm, with just a few words about the user's likes and dislikes, you find the perfect recipe just for them.

HackerNews called it "just a bunch of buzzwords", of course. But once the graphs went up into the right, with 50% month-over-month growth rates, everyone explained that they knew that this one was different. Popularity sky-rocketed, the engineers worked on scaling up the site, and though it was not the world's most sophisticated microservice architecture, it was medium-service architecture, at least.

The web front end would call the machine learning cluster, running on special GPU machines, to get the appropriate keywords by which to look up the recipe. Maybe not a the kind of 50-microservices-architecture that takes three whiteboards to explain, but at least it was easy enough to scale up horizontally. You hired a great Site Reliability Engineer, who built a sophisticated continuous delivery machine. As your machine learning team fine-tuned the model, it would slowly roll out into the cluster, running continous A/B tests that would immediately roll back the change if the model performed worse than before.

The SRE also made sure the web front-end would back off of a malfunctioning machine learning node, as those do sometimes. Instead of immediately reconnecting, it would try reconnecting at intervals starting at 5 milliseconds and increasing by powers of 2: 10ms, 20ms, and so on.

Amazing.

You will never forget what happened next. A new model was rolled out. It looked great. Performed wonderfully. The only problem was that it had a hidden time-bomb. The model had a small overfit that happend to match the sum of the user's ID and the time. This, in itself, is the kind of overfit that happens every day. Unfortunately, if that value exceeded a threshold, it triggered a bug in the machine learning library. When that happened, the node would become flakey, and start dropping random connections. Even worse, for the specific input used in the health checks, it would work: all nodes appeared healthy in the monitoring dashboard, and to the service discovery framework.

A nightmare scenario.

One by one, nodes started dropping off, as users with higher IDs connected and the seconds ticked on mercilessly. The front end started backing off: by 5ms, then 10ms, then 20ms.

The exponential function explodes fast, so of course the backoff (with jitter, as is common practice) had an upper limit. When the Site Reliability Engineer set the upper limit, there was a lot of things on their mind. Decisions are hard to make. Sometimes, one neuron firing makes all the difference. But neurons are small, and electrons are smaller.

When we look at the firing of a neuron, we can no longer imagine the world is as Maxwell and Newton imagined it to be. Quantum effects must be taken into account. As per the obviously correct Many-Worlds interpretation of Quantum Mechanics, the one world had split into two that would never interact again.

In one world, the SRE had set the maximum to 1 second. In the other, to 10 minutes. For a while, these worlds seemed to parallel each other closely: sure, a few bits on in a YAML file were different, but what storm could come from such a small butterfly?

It was not until the disasterous model roll-out that the worlds would diverge wildly. In the world where the limit was set to one second, the front ends were hammering the nodes mercilessly. Rolling back the model would mean that a node would start getting too many connections, and before a few seconds had passed, it would fall back down.

Eventually, in this world, the whole front-end had to be brought down, the model fully rolled back, and only then the front-end brought back up. This was too bad, because the front-end had a bad-but-working model built-in, and some recipes would still be found while the "outage" was happening. Sure, they were not the "wow you read my mind" quality, but they were still decent results.

Bringing down the whole front-end cluster, and bringing it up again, turned the outage from a blip in recipe click-through rates into a three-hour, news-coverage-worthy outage.

In the other world, where the back-off had a maximum of ten minutes, things progressed much more smoothly. As a machine learning node's model was rolled back, it came back up, and machines started connecting to it. The first one to be brought up did go down from connection overload -- but took ten minutes to do so, enough time to ascertain that this solution was correct. A few more nodes were rolled back, and as the connections grew, the roll back flowed through the fleet.

The outage has been managed, and other than a few irate customers posting on Twitter about looking for vegan recipes and getting a "meat lover's delight", the outage mostly went unnoticed.

Back-off is important. Exponential back-off with jitter and a maximum is almost always the right solution. Yes, the exponent matters a little. The initial back off matters a little. But the maximum matters a lot. Set the maximum to "human time frames": a few minutes (1-30) is a good balance.

Even in a big cluster, an extra action every 10 minutes will probably not cause serious downstream repercussions. But even the most entitled customer can be mollified by a support technician for five minutes doing "everything possible to find a solution" while waiting the clock out on the 10 minute back-off clock.

Choose maximums for back-off carefully, or the site you bring down may be your own.

Thanks to Avy Faingezicht for his feedback on an earlier draft. Any mistakes or issues that remain are my reponsibility.

    Site
    Archives
    Tags
    Atom feed

    Categories
    misc

    Links
    Python.org
    Moshe'z


Orbifolds and Other Games © Moshe Zadka 2024
